[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> The awakening could be
said to be the moment when you
realize you're in prison, the
moment when you experience
another reality, the moment when
you see there are other ways
of looking at it all.
I'm not talking about other
places in your thought
process--
but other.
Now what you call
that place from which
you look at your life
when before you were just
busy thinking you were
it, your incarnation life,
where do you look at it from?
And that's where we're
using the word "soul."
Now let's look at the
soul's predicament.
The soul had some karma to
work out, took an incarnation,
got lost in the
incarnation, and then
starts to awaken and
realize that it has just
taken an incarnation.
And it had to get lost and
go through the whole process
of awakening for the
incarnation to work out
the karma, which you created or
which is the manifest of what
your karma needs.
It's all fine.
There's no errors.
It's just interesting.
Oh, my God, have I been had.
I'm not that big at all.
So from the soul's point of
view, as you start to awaken,
you see the way in which the
incarnation sticks to you
as you're sort of
shaking it off,
like shaking off water
or stuff like that.
Now there's a tendency
because you've
been trapped in the incarnation
for so long, when you awaken,
to see it in negative terms.
It trapped me.
It's thick.
It's heavy.
It's something.
And you push against it.
It's like the renunciate path.
I just will push away life.
I will push away incarnation,
and then I will soar as a soul.
In other words, I
want to get high,
and I want to push away the low.
And low and high are still
seen as value things,
that higher is
better than lower.
Higher, I feel connected
to the universe.
I feel I'm in my soul.
Lower, I come down back into
my psychodynamic, social,
physical, somebody's
specialness, trapped back here
again.
The curriculum of the soul
has two components to it.
They're really interesting.
First of all, it's working
with its incarnation,
and it sees, ultimately, that
Buddha was absolutely right on,
that the clinging of mind, the
attraction, and the aversions
of mind are what juiced
the whole system,
and the suffering,
and the whole shtick.
So the soul is using the
experiences of incarnation
to get lost in, then
to awaken out of,
to see one's predicament,
and to get to the point
where one can be, as
Christ said, in the world
but not of the world.
You are not pushing
away your incarnation
because that's an aversion.
The versions are
from the ego level.
Soul doesn't have aversions.
The soul just sees aversions
and attractions within the ego.
Every time you're identified
with an attraction
or an aversion, you're
identified with your ego.
So the job of extricating
oneself into one's soul
is slowly cultivating
those qualities
which allow you to
see the whole process
and to calm yourself
into realizing
that your incarnation is
about extricating yourself
from attractions and
aversions so that you are not
lost in incarnation anymore.
The game is to go beyond
that into the point where
you are fully in the world
and fully not in the world.
There are stages where you get
into your soul where you say,
oh, I miss the passions of
life, meaning the passions,
the excitements that were
caused by being lost in it.
And you think, I'll
never have those again.
I'll never have
my first romance.
I'll never have this,
and I'll never have that.
Because those were so
adrenaline-rushy, heady stuff.
And that's a lot like
what is often called
the "Dark Night of the Soul."
We have sort of
realized that you're not
going to have the intensity
of the excitement that
came from being totally
lost into the linear drama
and not knowing
how it comes out.
It all comes out the same.
[CHUCKLES] It all turns
back into whatever it is.
[CHUCKLES] That's the
transitory nature of phenomena,
whether you like it or not.